feat(apple): Automatic Instrumentation (#3712)
getsentry/sentry-docs: src/platforms/apple/common/performance/instrumentation/automatic-instrumentation.mdx

---
title: Automatic Instrumentation Preview
sidebar_order: 10
description: "Learn what transactions are captured after tracing is enabled."
---

<Note>

This is a preview API, available in `7.2.0-beta.0` and above. Features available in a preview API are still in progress and may have bugs. We recognize the irony. The API may be renamed, changed, or removed in a future version.

Capturing transactions requires that you first <PlatformLink to="/performance/">set up performance monitoring</PlatformLink> if you haven't already.

</Note>

## UIViewController Instrumentation

This feature is available for iOS, tvOS, and Mac Catalyst, and only works for UIViewControllers.

The UIViewController Instrumentation, once enabled, captures transactions whenever your app loads a ViewController. The SDK sets the transaction name to the name of the ViewController, including the module; for example, `Your_App.MainViewController`, and the transaction operation to `ui.load`. The SDK creates spans to provide insight into the length of time each consumed by each of the following methods.

> ![UIViewController Transaction](ui-view-controller-transaction.png)

Author: `h`:  Update these screenshots as the operation names changed after merging https://github.com/getsentry/sentry-cocoa/pull/1164

You can opt out of this feature using options:

```swift {tabTitle:Swift}
import Sentry

SentrySDK.start { options in
    options.dsn = "___PUBLIC_DSN___"
    options.enableAutoUIPerformanceTracking = false
}
```

```objc {tabTitle:Objective-C}
@import Sentry;

[SentrySDK startWithConfigureOptions:^(SentryOptions *options) {
    options.dsn = @"___PUBLIC_DSN___";
    options.enableAutoUIPerformanceTracking = NO;
}];
```

## App Start Instrumentation

This feature is available for iOS, tvOS, and Mac Catalyst.

The App Start Instrumentation provides insight into how long your application takes to launch. It adds spans for different phases, from the application launch to the first auto-generated UI transaction.

> To enable this feature enable `AutoUIPerformanceTracking` and set a <PlatformLink to="/configuration/sampling/#setting-a-uniform-sample-rate">`tracesSampleRate`</PlatformLink> or a <PlatformLink to="/configuration/sampling/#setting-a-sampling-function">`tracesSampler`</PlatformLink>. The SDK differentiates between a cold and a warm start, and doesn't track hot starts/resumes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable this feature enable `AutoUIPerformanceTracking`. The SDK differentiates between a cold and a warm start, and doesn't track hot starts/resumes.
```

the note already mentions that you should set up the performance feature first

* __Cold start__: App launched for the first time, after a reboot or update. The app is not in memory and no process exists.
* __Warm start__: App launched at least once, is partially in memory, and no process exists.

The SDK uses the process start time as the beginning of the app start and the [`UIWindowDidBecomeVisibleNotification`][UIWindow] as the end. It creates the following spans:
* __Pre Main__: From the process start time to the runtime init.
* __UIKit and Application Init__: From the runtime init to the [`didFinishLaunchingNotification`][didFinishLaunching].
* __Initial Frame Render__: From the [`didFinishLaunchingNotification`][didFinishLaunching] to [`UIWindowDidBecomeVisibleNotification`][UIWindow].

![App Start Transaction](app-start-transaction.png)

You can opt out of this feature using options:

```swift {tabTitle:Swift}
import Sentry

SentrySDK.start { options in
    options.dsn = "___PUBLIC_DSN___"

>     options.enableAppStartMeasuring = false

Reviewer: I thought that we decided not offering such an option as it's bounded to the `enableAutoUIPerformanceTracking` anyway.

Author: Okay, then I'm going to remove it here and create an issue for removing it in Cocoa. We can always add such a feature later on.

---
title: Automatic Instrumentation Preview
sidebar_order: 10
description: "Learn what transactions are captured after tracing is enabled."
redirect_from:

>   - /performance/included-instrumentation/

Reviewer 2: I don't believe we need a redirect for this page?

Author: Ups a good catch. No, we don't need that. Was a copy-paste error.

---

<Note>

> This is a preview API, available in `7.2.0-beta.0` and above. Features available in a preview API are still in-progress and may have bugs. We recognize the irony. The API may be renamed, changed, or removed in a future version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is a preview API, available in `7.2.0-beta.0` and above. Features available in a preview API are still in progress and may have bugs. We recognize the irony. The API may be renamed, changed, or removed in a future version.
```

Capturing transactions requires that you first <PlatformLink to="/performance/">set up performance monitoring</PlatformLink> if you haven't already.

</Note>

## UIViewController Instrumentation

> This feature is available for iOS, tvOS, and Mac Catalyst and only works for UIViewControllers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This feature is available for iOS, tvOS, and Mac Catalyst, and only works for UIViewControllers.
```

> The UIViewController Instrumentation, once enabled, captures transactions whenever your app loads a ViewController. The SDK sets the transaction name to the name of the ViewController, including the module, for example, `Your_App.MainViewController`, and the transaction operation to `ui.rendering`. The SDK creates spans to give you insight into how long each of the following methods took.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The UIViewController Instrumentation, once enabled, captures transactions whenever your app loads a ViewController. The SDK sets the transaction name to the name of the ViewController, including the module; for example, `Your_App.MainViewController`, and the transaction operation to `ui.rendering`. The SDK creates spans to provide insight into the length of time each consumed by each of the following methods.
```

![UIViewController Transaction](ui-view-controller-transaction.png)

> If you'd like to opt out of this feature, you can do so using options:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can opt out of this feature using options:
```

```swift {tabTitle:Swift}
import Sentry

SentrySDK.start { options in
    options.dsn = "___PUBLIC_DSN___"
    options.enableAutoUIPerformanceTracking = false
}
```

```objc {tabTitle:Objective-C}
@import Sentry;

[SentrySDK startWithConfigureOptions:^(SentryOptions *options) {
    options.dsn = @"___PUBLIC_DSN___";
    options.enableAutoUIPerformanceTracking = NO;
}];
```

## App Start Instrumentation

This feature is available for iOS, tvOS, and Mac Catalyst.

> The App Start Instrumentation gives you insight into how long your application takes to launch. It adds spans for different phases of the application launch to the first auto-generated UI transaction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The App Start Instrumentation provides insight into how long your application takes to launch. It adds spans for different phases, from the application launch to the first auto-generated UI transaction.
```

> For this feature to work, ensure that `AutoUIPerformanceTracking` is enabled and set a <PlatformLink to="/configuration/sampling/#setting-a-uniform-sample-rate">`tracesSampleRate`</PlatformLink> or a <PlatformLink to="/configuration/sampling/#setting-a-sampling-function">`tracesSampler`</PlatformLink>. The SDK differentiates between a cold and a warm start and doesn't track hot starts/resumes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable this feature enable `AutoUIPerformanceTracking` and set a <PlatformLink to="/configuration/sampling/#setting-a-uniform-sample-rate">`tracesSampleRate`</PlatformLink> or a <PlatformLink to="/configuration/sampling/#setting-a-sampling-function">`tracesSampler`</PlatformLink>. The SDK differentiates between a cold and a warm start, and doesn't track hot starts/resumes.
```

> * __Cold start__: App launched for the first time, after a reboot or update. The app is not in memory, and no process exists.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* __Cold start__: App launched for the first time, after a reboot or update. The app is not in memory and no process exists.
```

* __Warm start__: App launched at least once, is partially in memory, and no process exists.

The SDK uses the process start time as the beginning of the app start and the [`UIWindowDidBecomeVisibleNotification`][UIWindow] as the end. It creates the following spans:
* __Pre Main__: From the process start time to the runtime init.
* __UIKit and Application Init__: From the runtime init to the [`didFinishLaunchingNotification`][didFinishLaunching].
* __Initial Frame Render__: From the [`didFinishLaunchingNotification`][didFinishLaunching] to [`UIWindowDidBecomeVisibleNotification`][UIWindow].

![App Start Transaction](app-start-transaction.png)

> If you'd like to opt out of this feature, you can do so using options:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can opt out of this feature using options:
```
